Before moving on to the next several videos.
In this section, I want to provide a definition and some examples of the distinction between a latent
and a manifest variable.
These are terms in statistics that are important for studying any complex system.
And this distinction is particularly relevant for LMS and mechanistic interpretability, because in
general we are usually not terribly interested in manifest variables themselves, but instead just use
the manifest variables to try to measure or make inferences about latent constructs.
So what do these two terms mean?
A manifest variable is any variable that can be measured.
It is something that you can quantify directly with numbers or that you can represent using numbers.
You can think of variables like salary, height, calories in a meal, the number of seats in a sports
stadium, things in the world that you can directly observe and measure.
Those are manifest variables.
Latent variables, on the other hand, are things that we believe exist, but we cannot directly measure
them.
This is often the case in psychological variables.
For example, think of the concept of attention.
You are probably paying attention right now, but what does attention actually mean?
How do we measure it?
Well, attention is a latent variable because it cannot be directly measured.
We can measure manifest variables that we believe are related to attention, like test performance or
eye movements.
And then we can try to infer attention from the manifest variables.
For example, if you and I are in a conversation face to face and you're looking at me, we're making
eye contact, then I assume that you are paying attention to me.
Of course, latent variables do not necessarily correlate perfectly with manifest variables.
You could be looking directly at me.
You could be making eye contact with me.
That's a manifest variable that I can measure and yet not paying any attention to what I'm saying.
Okay, let me give you a few more examples to make sure this is concrete.
So a manifest variable could be someone's self-reported score on a questionnaire.
For example, the question do you enjoy meeting new people.
And you can answer that between 1 and 9.
Now the thing is no one is really interested in a number to this question.
Instead, people are interested in personality traits such as extraversion, but extraversion is a latent
variable.
It cannot be measured directly.
And, you know, we don't know where in the brain and the body this construct actually exists.
So instead, scientists will measure manifest variables that they believe are related to this latent
construct, and then make inferences about the latent variable based on the manifest variable.
By the way, in the previous slide I called this latent variable.
Here I'm calling it a latent construct.
People use different terms here.
And so I'm going to keep cycling through different terminologies just to make sure you are familiar
with various terms that are used for latent sources.
So here is another example.
There is a latent factor called cardiovascular health.
Lots of people are interested in their cardiovascular health.
and the people who aren't interested probably should be more interested in their cardiovascular health.
But cardiovascular health is not something that we can directly measure or observe.
So instead, you can go to the doctor and measure other manifest variables like heart rate dynamics,
blood pressure, and so on.
So the idea again is that we don't really care about the manifest variables themselves.
Instead, we just use the manifest variables as a way to try to estimate and understand properties of
this latent factor.
So we measure the manifest variables and then we make inferences about the latent factors.
Of course another famous example is intelligence.
We do not really know exactly what intelligence is or what it means for a brain or a person, for it
to be more or less intelligent.
So instead we measure manifest variables like grades in school, performance in exams, maybe other
factors like income or job performance reviews.
And we take those manifest variables as indicators of a latent construct that we call intelligence.
And I am sure that you are fully aware that this is highly imperfect, meaning you can have very intelligent
people who are not successful in a particular job, or maybe they don't do well on a particular exam.
And I'm sure you can also think of some examples of people who are not very intelligent and yet can
become very successful in their career.
Anyway, more germane to llms and interpretability and AI safety, we want to know, for example, what
a given law understands about the world, but we do not know what that means exactly or how to measure
it.
So we do the best we can by measuring manifest variables that we have access to.
For example activation values or output logits for next token predictions.
So these are the quantities in the models that have numbers we can extract and analyze.
And then we use those numbers, perform some statistical analyses and then try to make some inferences
about things that are important to understand, but that we cannot measure directly.
I have stated multiple times that we use manifest variables to make inferences about latent factors.
What does that really mean and how does it work?
So the idea is that there is some latent variable existing in some platonic world.
And we want to understand that latent variable, but we cannot measure it.
But we do have access to lots of manifest variables.
For example, the activations of neurons in an MLP expansion layer in, I don't know, transformer block
seven.
So the idea is that we take this information and we combine it in some way, like taking a linear weighted
combination.
Or perhaps there are some nonlinearities in here as well.
But somehow we statistically pool all of this information together.
And that is our inferred measurement of the latent variable.
Now, there are quite a few possible analysis methods that have been developed in statistics and in
machine learning for estimating latent factors.
And here's a non-exhaustive list of some of them.
These analyses are all different from each other.
They all rely on different equations.
They make different assumptions, and they have different statistical procedures, but they're all focused
on the same goal, which is to transform a collection of manifest variables into a latent factor.
And all of these analyses also suffer from the same fundamental difficulty, which is that these latent
factors are not directly observable, and therefore we can never really know if we are combining the
manifest variables in the right way.
Of course, there are statistical and validity checks.
There are things like common sense and critical thinking.
So it's not like we're completely in the dark about these analyses.
But my point is, it's hard to know if we are applying an analysis that gives us a good approximation
or a bad approximation to the latent variable that we really are interested in.
Now, very often good experiment design and validation in a separate test set.
These are good ways to ascertain the validity of these analyses, but it's just a hard problem in general.
Over the next several videos, I will introduce you to two specific methods for inferring the existence
and dynamics of latent variables based on manifest variables.
Those are sparse autoencoders and generalized eigen decomposition.
So that's it for this overview video.
The important take home point is that estimating latent variables is important but tricky.
That is true in general for any complex system, and it is particularly true in the context of AI safety
because concepts like deception, hallucinations, flattery, and other dangerous behaviors, these
are all latent constructs that cannot be directly measured, but instead must be inferred from model
weights and activations.